<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prologue</h2>
			<table>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
					<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The brightest heaven of invention,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So great an object. Can this cockpit hold</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within this wooden O the very casques</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That did affright the air at Agincourt?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O pardon! since a crooked figure may</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Attest in little place a million,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On your imaginary forces work.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Suppose within the girdle of these walls</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose high upreared and abutting fronts</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Into a thousand parts divide one man,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make imaginary puissance.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Turning the accomplishment of many years</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Into an hourglass: for the which supply,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Admit me Chorus to this history;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.</span>
						</p>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td/>
					<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
		</section>
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></h3>
				<p>London. An antechamber in the King’s palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b> and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Ely</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My lord, I’ll tell you, that self bill is urg’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which in the eleventh year of the last king’s reign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was like, and had indeed against us passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that the scambling and unquiet time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did push it out of farther question.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It must be thought on. If it pass against us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We lose the better half of our possession:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all the temporal lands, which men devout</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By testament have given to the Church,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would they strip from us; being valu’d thus:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As much as would maintain, to the King’s honour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, to relief of lazars and weak age,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A hundred almshouses right well supplied;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to the coffers of the King beside,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A thousand pounds by th’ year. Thus runs the bill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This would drink deep.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">’Twould drink the cup and all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>But what prevention?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The King is full of grace and fair regard.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And a true lover of the holy Church.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The courses of his youth promis’d it not.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The breath no sooner left his father’s body</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that his wildness, mortified in him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Consideration like an angel came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leaving his body as a paradise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>T’ envelope and contain celestial spirits.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never was such a sudden scholar made,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never came reformation in a flood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With such a heady currance scouring faults,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As in this king.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">We are blessed in the change.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear him but reason in divinity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, all-admiring, with an inward wish</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You would desire the King were made a prelate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You would say it hath been all in all his study;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>List his discourse of war, and you shall hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A fearful battle rendered you in music;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turn him to any cause of policy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The air, a chartered libertine, is still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that the art and practic part of life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must be the mistress to this theoric:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since his addiction was to courses vain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And never noted in him any study,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Any retirement, any sequestration</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From open haunts and popularity.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Neighboured by fruit of baser quality;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so the Prince obscured his contemplation</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It must be so, for miracles are ceased,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And therefore we must needs admit the means</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How things are perfected.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">But, my good lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How now for mitigation of this bill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Incline to it, or no?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">He seems indifferent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or rather swaying more upon our part</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For I have made an offer to his Majesty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Upon our spiritual convocation</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in regard of causes now in hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which I have opened to his Grace at large,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As touching France, to give a greater sum</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than ever at one time the clergy yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did to his predecessors part withal.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>How did this offer seem received, my lord?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>With good acceptance of his Majesty;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save that there was not time enough to hear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I perceived his Grace would fain have done,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The severals and unhidden passages</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And generally to the crown and seat of France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>What was th’ impediment that broke this off?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The French ambassador upon that instant</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Craved audience; and the hour, I think, is come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>It is.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then go we in, to know his embassy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which I could with a ready guess declare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td>I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></h3>
				<p>The same. The presence chamber.</p>
				<table>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry, Gloucester, Bedford, Clarence, Warwick, Westmorland, Exeter</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span> Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Of Exeter</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not here in presence.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">Send for him, good uncle.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl Of Westmorland</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Shall we call in th’ ambassador, my liege?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before we hear him, of some things of weight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That task our thoughts concerning us and France.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop of Canterbury</b> and the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Ely</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>God and his angels guard your sacred throne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make you long become it!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">Sure, we thank you.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My learned lord, we pray you to proceed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And justly and religiously unfold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why the law Salic that they have in France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or should or should not bar us in our claim.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or nicely charge your understanding soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With opening titles miscreate, whose right</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suits not in native colours with the truth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For God doth know how many now in health</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall drop their blood in approbation</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of what your reverence shall incite us to.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How you awake our sleeping sword of war.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We charge you in the name of God, take heed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For never two such kingdoms did contend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are every one a woe, a sore complaint</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That makes such waste in brief mortality.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Under this conjuration speak, my lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For we will hear, note, and believe in heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That what you speak is in your conscience washed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As pure as sin with baptism.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That owe yourselves, your lives, and services</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To this imperial throne. There is no bar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make against your Highness’ claim to France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But this, which they produce from Pharamond:</span>
								<br/>
								<span><i xml:lang="la">In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant</i>,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“No woman shall succeed in Salic land;”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be the realm of France, and Pharamond</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The founder of this law and female bar.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet their own authors faithfully affirm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That the land Salic is in Germany,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where Charles the Great, having subdu’d the Saxons,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There left behind and settled certain French;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who, holding in disdain the German women</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For some dishonest manners of their life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Establish’d then this law, to wit, no female</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should be inheritrix in Salic land;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which Salic, as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is at this day in Germany call’d Meissen.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then doth it well appear the Salic law</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was not devised for the realm of France;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor did the French possess the Salic land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Until four hundred one and twenty years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>After defunction of King Pharamond,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Idly suppos’d the founder of this law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who died within the year of our redemption</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Subdu’d the Saxons, and did seat the French</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond the river Sala, in the year</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did, as heir general, being descended</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make claim and title to the crown of France.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hugh Capet also, who usurp’d the crown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To find his title with some shows of truth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Convey’d himself as the heir to the Lady Lingare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the Tenth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could not keep quiet in his conscience,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was reunited to the crown of France.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To hold in right and title of the female.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So do the kings of France unto this day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bar your Highness claiming from the female,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rather choose to hide them in a net</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than amply to imbar their crooked titles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Usurp’d from you and your progenitors.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td>May I with right and conscience make this claim?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“When the man dies, let the inheritance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stand for your own! Unwind your bloody flag!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look back into your mighty ancestors!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who on the French ground play’d a tragedy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Making defeat on the full power of France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whiles his most mighty father on a hill</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forage in blood of French nobility.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O noble English, that could entertain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With half their forces the full pride of France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let another half stand laughing by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All out of work and cold for action!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop Of Ely</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with your puissant arm renew their feats.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You are their heir; you sit upon their throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blood and courage that renowned them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is in the very May-morn of his youth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Of Exeter</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As did the former lions of your blood.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl Of Westmorland</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They know your Grace hath cause and means and might;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So hath your Highness. Never King of England</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lie pavilion’d in the fields of France.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With blood and sword and fire to win your right;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In aid whereof we of the spiritualty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As never did the clergy at one time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring in to any of your ancestors.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We must not only arm to invade the French,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But lay down our proportions to defend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against the Scot, who will make road upon us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all advantages.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They of those marches, gracious sovereign,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be a wall sufficient to defend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our inland from the pilfering borderers.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But fear the main intendment of the Scot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who hath been still a giddy neighbour to us;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For you shall read that my great-grandfather</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Never went with his forces into France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But that the Scot on his unfurnish’d kingdom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came pouring, like the tide into a breach,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With ample and brim fullness of his force,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Girdling with grievous siege castles and towns;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That England, being empty of defence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath shook and trembled at the ill neighbourhood.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She hath been then more fear’d than harm’d, my liege;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For hear her but exampl’d by herself:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When all her chivalry hath been in France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she a mourning widow of her nobles,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She hath herself not only well defended</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But taken and impounded as a stray</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The King of Scots; whom she did send to France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make her chronicle as rich with praise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is the ooze and bottom of the sea</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Earl Of Westmorland</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But there’s a saying very old and true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">“If that you will France win,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Then with Scotland first begin.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For once the eagle England being in prey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tear and havoc more than she can eat.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Of Exeter</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It follows then the cat must stay at home;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet that is but a crush’d necessity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The advised head defends itself at home;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For government, though high and low and lower,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Congreeing in a full and natural close,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like music.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Archbishop Of Canterbury</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Therefore doth heaven divide</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The state of man in divers functions,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Setting endeavour in continual motion,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Obedience; for so work the honeybees,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creatures that by a rule in nature teach</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The act of order to a peopled kingdom.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They have a king and officers of sorts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where some, like magistrates, correct at home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Others like merchants, venture trade abroad,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Which pillage they with merry march bring home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the tent-royal of their emperor;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who, busied in his majesty, surveys</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The singing masons building roofs of gold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The civil citizens kneading up the honey,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The poor mechanic porters crowding in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Delivering o’er to executors pale</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The lazy yawning drone. I this infer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That many things, having full reference</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To one consent, may work contrariously.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As many arrows, loosed several ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come to one mark; as many ways meet in one town;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As many lines close in the dial’s centre;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So many a thousand actions, once afoot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>End in one purpose, and be all well borne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Divide your happy England into four,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof take you one quarter into France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If we, with thrice such powers left at home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let us be worried and our nation lose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The name of hardiness and policy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td>Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt some Attendants.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now are we well resolv’d; and, by God’s help,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yours, the noble sinews of our power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ruling in large and ample empery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tombless, with no remembrance over them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Either our history shall with full mouth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not worshipp’d with a waxen epitaph.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ambassadors of France</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now are we well prepar’d to know the pleasure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your greeting is from him, not from the King.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Ambassador</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May’t please your Majesty to give us leave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freely to render what we have in charge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or shall we sparingly show you far off</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unto whose grace our passion is as subject</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is our wretches fett’red in our prisons;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ambassador</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">Thus, then, in few.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your Highness, lately sending into France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In answer of which claim, the prince our master</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Says that you savour too much of your youth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bids you be advis’d there’s nought in France</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That can be with a nimble galliard won.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You cannot revel into dukedoms there.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span> What treasure, uncle?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Of Exeter</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i6">Tennis-balls, my liege.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His present and your pains we thank you for.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When we have match’d our rackets to these balls,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We will, in France, by God’s grace, play a set</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all the courts of France will be disturb’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With chaces. And we understand him well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How he comes o’er us with our wilder days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not measuring what use we made of them.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We never valu’d this poor seat of England;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And therefore, living hence, did give ourself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To barbarous licence; as ’tis ever common</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That men are merriest when they are from home.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I do rouse me in my throne of France.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that I have laid by my majesty</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And plodded like a man for working days,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I will rise there with so full a glory</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath turn’d his balls to gun-stones, and his soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And some are yet ungotten and unborn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But this lies all within the will of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To whom I do appeal; and in whose name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To venge me as I may, and to put forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My rightful hand in a well-hallow’d cause.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His jest will savour but of shallow wit,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Convey them with safe conduct.⁠—Fare you well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ambassadors</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke Of Exeter</td>
						<td>This was a merry message.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We hope to make the sender blush at it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That may give furtherance to our expedition;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For we have now no thought in us but France,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save those to God, that run before our business.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore, let our proportions for these wars</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be soon collected, and all things thought upon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That may with reasonable swiftness add</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More feathers to our wings; for, God before,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore let every man now task his thought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That this fair action may on foot be brought.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</td>
					</tr>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
