<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prologue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prologue</h2>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The brightest heaven of invention,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So great an object. Can this cockpit hold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within this wooden O the very casques</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That did affright the air at Agincourt?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O pardon! since a crooked figure may</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Attest in little place a million,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On your imaginary forces work.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suppose within the girdle of these walls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose high upreared and abutting fronts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into a thousand parts divide one man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And make imaginary puissance.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Turning the accomplishment of many years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Into an hourglass: for the which supply,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Admit me Chorus to this history;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
